All right, so in the last video,
I noted that the assertion error was strong when an execution ended
and as a result, the next assert statement in the method was never tested.
I'm talking specifically about our getPetTypeAgeDescription method.
So, let's actually run this again just to confirm that.
And you can see that our code is basically bombing on line 68,
which is this assert and therefore the third assert is never been tested.
All right, so let's fix this bit of code.
What I'm going to do is paste in a new version of this code,
this block of code here before the final assert.
So, what I've done there is change this now.
Basically, I've added an else if there as you can see, the parrot,
and also the else block is now a catch-all for everything else as you can see.
So, if we now run the code again,
we've no longer got an error there.
We can see that now our assert on line 83
has been executed and the reason we've got an error there;
it tells us basically no description exists for parrot age 0.
Basically, we've now hit our postcondition assertion which is good.
Now, note that this is not actually an error in the code
but an admission in the insertion code.
So, what we really need to do is come down here after pup,
add a comma, and chick in double quotes,
it's applicable for a parrot.
Run this, again we've got assertions enabled.
And now everything's working as it should.
So, let's actually revisit this post-condition that we've got on screen.
What I want to do is replace the code. I'm going to do that,
so replace this code as you can see,
so here what I'm doing now is creating an array list
to contain the possible values for petAge description
prior to using it in the assert statement.
Now, this code's got the same result. If we run it first and then we'll talk about it.
Same result, however, it is bad form.
The only purpose of the local variable assert array list
on line 83 is to support an assert statement,
but even when assertions are disabled, this object is created.
Now this is a small overhead in this instance,
but in general, you do not want to create variables for assert statements,
a method would have been a better choice since the execution of the method would not occur
if assertions were disabled.
So, if I replace that code.
So with that code that I pasted in, do you see anything wrong with it?
Let's try it. First, we'll run it with assertions enabled.
Noting the output there, particularly the age. Let's actually run it
and we'll remove, or run it with assertions disabled I should say.
Run that, run the code.
So, you can see that the output is different now. We've got zero
for petAge.
So in this assertion effectively, I've created a side effect,
meaning the assertion affected the application code.
So if we had used petAge in the application code after this assertion,
the assertion would have possibly changed the outcome as it did with the output shown.
Now you may be tested on the exam to look for side effects of an assert statement,
possibly in not such simple terms as I've shown here,
so review assert statements carefully.
So, let's replace that code again,
including the system.out.println.
So, I've reverted the code so that once again we do get an assertion error
when assertions are enabled.
I want to use this class with its assertion error
in some additional assertion tests, so we'll just run this again.
That's when assertion is disabled, we'll enable them again.
Run it.
All right, so we are getting an assertion error again.
Now again, I want to use this class with its assertion error
in some additional assertion tests.
You can see the assertion error we're getting relates to the fact that parrot
hasn't got an entry in our string array.
All right, so I want to talk a bit more about enabling and disabling assertions.
So far, we've seen that we've enabled assertion using dash –ea or dash -enable
assertions without any additional information.
This enables assertions for all classes and all packages
with the exception of system-level classes.
Java does give you more control over the granularity of this setting,
so let's actually go back to our previous class
that we used in previous videos, assertion example.
We're going to add a call to the main method of the class we just tested
in the main method of this class assertion example.
So, what I'm going to do is basically in the main method, we come down to the main method.
I'm going to put it right at the top before the byte definition.
So, InvariantExamples.main(args).
So, you can see what we're doing there, we're actually calling the main method for invariant examples.
So, executing this class with assertions enabled,
which we'll just double check we have still got that enabled for our
assertion example.
We haven't, so I'll just make sure that's enabled.
And you can see here, running the code with assertions enabled
gives us the same result as just running in variant examples.main,
you can see that we've got an assertion error thrown before any additional code
in assertion example is able to run, but maybe
we just want to ignore assertions for the invariant examples class
while we're testing assertions for the enclosing code in assertion example.
So, let's go back to our VM options for assertion example,
and here what we're going to do
is put -da:assertion
.invariant.invariant examples.
Obviously, you could do this from the command line.
da stands for disabling assertions.
You can do that for one class.
We're passing the class to an argument to -da with the colon indicator.
So, if we run this, we'll click okay first and then run it.
By doing that, we've got the following output as you can see on the screen there.
Basically, invariant examples class run with assertions disabled
while the rest of our code in a limited example here in the insertion example class
ran with assertions enabled.
You can also tell the JVM
to enable assertions for one particular package using a construct.
Let's go back to our configuration setup again.
So, I'm going to replace that
and make it –ea:assertion…
So, here now we've got the dash –ea enable assertions colon
followed by package name followed by the ellipsis three periods.
So, here we want all classes in the assertion package
to have assertions enabled.
If we run that,
and we again have assertions now enabled
for assertion.invariant.invariantexamples, so did that surprise you?
So, using the constructor which we're going to have a look at again,
-ea:assertion… enables assertions
for the specified package as well as all its sub-packages.
To ignore a sub package, we can add to
it –da:assertion.invariant…
Run the code again,
and now our output confirms the assertions are enabled for the class in the assertion package,
but not the one in the assertion.invariant package.
All right, so examine this following option, what do you suppose this does?
You see the example there –ea:…
Well, this switch disables assertions in the unnamed package
in the current working directory.
There's two other options dash -esa or dash –enablesystemassertions,
as well as dash -dsa or dash –disablesystemassertions.
These are separate switches to enable and disable assertions in
all of the built-in system classes.
You cannot pass additional arguments to these switches to be more specific,
but you can use dash -ea and dash -da
with specific system classes and packages.
Now the exam might test you on your knowledge of these switches.
The table below lists the options or switches available for dash –ea
and dash –da.
Note that the da option is used in conjunction with an ea option
to allow more specificity.
The first one, none. That enables or disables assertions
for all classes except system classes.
That's java -ea or java -da
or java -enableassertions or java –disableassertions.
Obviously, you wouldn't use java if you're using the IDE.
You pass that as the VM option.
Next example, :className.
That enables or disables assertions for the specified class and can include a system class.
Example that java –ea:assertion.AssertionExample
or java –disableassertions:assertion.AssertioneExample.
Next, one is :packageName…
that enables or disables assertions for the specified package
including any sub packages.
It can include a system package,
so java –ea:assertion…
or java –enableassertion:assertion.invariant…
or java –da:assertion.invariant…
And the last one is a colon : followed by three dots, the ellipses,
that enables or disables assertions in the unnamed package
in the current working directory.
Example that java –ea:...
or java –da: again the ellipsis, the three dots.
All right, so in the past three videos, we've talked about many types of invariants,
the use of assertions, how to enable and disable them,
and how to write assert statements, as well as some best practices around their usage
In the next video, we're going to move on and talk about some out of ordinary topics
on exception handling, which might find their way into an exam question.
See you in the next video.